# AirQuality Data Acquisition API (discussion)

## Challenges

- Sensors can have limited buffers and cannot store a lot of data in case of server downtime, some of them can store no data at all.
- Some sensors can be misconfigured or compromised and could pose risk of incidental or intentional DDoS.
- Sensor ability to transfer data securely and/or solve security challenges can be limited.
- Sensor location is a sensitive information.

**Our final design should address all of the above.**

## STANDARDS

### Pollutants and their measurement units

- Carbon Monoxide - Concentration, unit: **mg/m³**
- Lead - Concentration, unit: **µg/m³**
- Nitrogen Dioxide - Concentration, unit: **µg/m³**
- Ozone - Concentration, unit: **µg/m³**
- Particulate Matter (PM10) - Concentration, unit: **µg/m³**
- Particulate Matter (PM2.5) - Concentration, unit: **µg/m³**
- Sulfur Dioxide - Concentration, unit: **µg/m³**

## Protocols

- MQTT (ISO/IEC PRF 20922)
- REST HTTP(S)

## Sensor identification

#### Sensor Unique Identifier (SUID)

This identifier is generated by the manufacturer.

**Length:** Exactly 128 bits.

Based on Universally Unique IDentifier ([rfc4122](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122)) URN Namespace for SUID.

**Example SUID:** `123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426655440000`


## JSON Payload

Example:

```json
[
	{
		"timestamp": 1485778030,
		"readings": {
			"PM2_5": 201.1,
			"PM10": 102.0,
			"TEMP": 12.7
		}
	},
	{
		"timestamp": 1485778031,
		"readings": {
			"PM2_5": 202.1,
			"PM10": 101.0
		}
	}
]
```

Payload shall be an array of at least one **observation**. 
Clients may choose to send one observation per request or to send them in bulk. 
Each **observation** shall be independent of others. 

**observation** - Object containing a **timestamp** and **readings**

**timestamp** - Unix Epoch Time GMT+0000

**readings** - Object containing at least one association between **Reading type** and its value at **timestamp**

### Reading types 

- `CO` – Carbon Monoxide (unit: **mg/m³**)
- `PB` – Lead (unit: **µg/m³**)
- `NO2` – Nitrogen Dioxide (unit: **µg/m³**)
- `O3` – Ozone (unit: **µg/m³**)
- `PM10` – PM10 (unit: **µg/m³**)
- `PM2_5` – PM2.5 (unit: **µg/m³**)
- `SO2` – Sulfur Dioxide (unit: **µg/m³**)
- `TEMP` – Temperature (unit: **Celsius**)
- `HUM` – Humidity (unit: **%**)
- `PRES` - Atmospheric Pressure (unit: **hPa**)

All Float values.

## MQTT

(TBD)

## REST API - ROUGUE variant

This variant is to be used in DIY devices, prototypes and sensor with poor accuracy. No authentication is used, using `SUID` for the first time will register the device.

### Reading request

`POST /sensors/[SUID]/readings`

**Payload:**

See JSON Payload section.

**Response:**

Status 200, empty response

## REST API - SECURE variant

This protocol is to be used by certified devices and readings should be considered accurate therefore sensor identity must be validated.

SSL/TLS Secure transport is required.

#### Authentication

Sensor will receive `SECRET` during registration.
For secure identification of the device `HMAC` will be used to send hash with every payload. The `SECRET` length is 256 bytes.

### Registration 

Registration is automatic and will be performed during first request (or next if failed).

Desired scenario:

- Sensor is powered and connected to the internet.
- Device should use DHCP and start data acquisition.
- User goes to `sensor.opensmog.org`
- Enters the SUID (printed on package as well as on the device sticker). 
- User enters the street address (or lat/lon) of sensor location.
- Device is ready.

### Registration request

`PUT /sensors/[SUID]`

**Payload:**

Example:
```json
{
	"manufacturer": "ACME INC",
	"model": "X9000",
	...
}
```

This may contain more meta-data about the sensor. TBD.

**Response:**

256-bit `SECRET`.

Status 200, `text/plain` 
```
F9954C7A7A668E16A6572B4C49DA4
```

### Reading request

`POST /sensors/[SUID]/readings`

**Headers:**

`Authorization: OpenSmogHash [HASH]`

If no such header is sent and the `SUID` is not registered via **SECURE** API, the server should assume **ROGUE** API variant.
If no such header is sent and the `SUID` is registered via **SECURE** API, the server should respond with 403 Forbidden.
If the header is sent and the `SUID` is not registered via **SECURE** API, the server should ignore the header.
If `HASH` is not correct, the server should respond with 401 Unauthorized. 

**WARNING:** If device is reflashed and forgot the `SECRET` it should provide a new `SUID`.

**Payload:**

See JSON Payload section.

**Response:**

Status 200, empty response

## OpenSmogHash (HMAC)

Entire payload hashed (SHA256) with concatenated `SECRET` at the end.

Pseudocode: 

```
SHA256(CONCAT(PAYLOAD,SECRET))
```
